A large language model (LLM) is a neural network trained on a vast amount of text for natural language processing tasks, especially language generation. LLMs can typically generate, summarize, translate, and analyze text in many contexts, and are a foundational technology behind modern chatbots.[1] Biased or inaccurate training data can make an LLM's output less reliable.[2]

LLMs are typically based on transformer architecture, which is more parallelizable than earlier recurrent neural network models.[3] Generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs) are a type of LLM that is pre-trained to predict the next word.[4] GPTs are then often fine-tuned to follow instructions and to behave as assistants.[5]

Benchmark evaluations for LLMs attempt to measure model reasoning, factual accuracy, alignment, and safety.[6]

History

The number of publications about large language models by year grouped by publication types

The training compute of notable large models in FLOPs vs publication date over the period 2010–2024. For overall notable models (top left), frontier models (top right), top language models (bottom left) and top models within leading companies (bottom right). The majority of these models are language models.

The training compute of notable large AI models in FLOPs vs publication date over the period 2017–2024. The majority of large models are language models or multimodal models with language capacity.
Before the emergence of transformer-based models in 2017, some language models were considered large relative to the computational and data constraints of their time. In the early 1990s, IBM's statistical models pioneered word alignment techniques for machine translation, laying the groundwork for corpus-based language modeling. In 2001, a smoothed n-gram model, such as those employing Kneser–Ney smoothing, trained on 300 million words, achieved state-of-the-art perplexity on benchmark tests.[7] During the 2000s, with the rise of widespread internet access, researchers began compiling massive text datasets from the web ("web as corpus"[8]) to train statistical language models.[9][10]

Moving beyond n-gram models, researchers started in 2000 to use neural networks as language models.[11] Following the breakthrough of deep neural networks in image classification around 2012,[12] similar architectures were adapted for language tasks. This shift was marked by the development of word embeddings (e.g., Word2Vec by Mikolov in 2013) and sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models using LSTM. In 2016, Google transitioned its translation service to neural machine translation (NMT), replacing statistical phrase-based models with deep recurrent neural networks. These early NMT systems used LSTM-based encoder-decoder architectures, as they preceded the invention of transformers.


An illustration of the main components of the transformer model from the original paper, where layers were normalized after (instead of before) multiheaded attention
At the 2017 NeurIPS conference, Google researchers introduced the transformer architecture in their landmark paper "Attention Is All You Need".[3] This paper's goal was to improve upon 2014 seq2seq technology, and was based mainly on the attention mechanism developed by Bahdanau et al. in 2014.[13][14] The following year in 2018, BERT was introduced and quickly became "ubiquitous".[15] Though the original transformer has both encoder and decoder blocks, BERT is an encoder-only model. Academic and research usage of BERT began to decline in 2023, following rapid improvements in the abilities of decoder-only models (such as GPT) to solve tasks via prompting.[1